---
title: The Lost Paradise
author: Nalin Marambe
linkedin: 
---

To the ancient travelers, Sri Lanka was at the center of paradise. But
to many of us it was our home. When visitors came to us, our homes were
open, warm and friendly. We have a beautiful country, but that beauty
came to life because the people were beautiful with beaming smiles and
warm hearts. We were a bunch of people who helped each other even though
our pocket holes were big enough for a buffalo to walk through.

They say, the 70’s were tough, especially for young parents at that time
with kids growing up. Our country was isolated compared to the times
before and after. But people who went through those tough times endured,
I guess all because due to our innocence.

The 80’s, we had opportunity travel all round, more opportunities to
work and in education. The Government at that time opened up our economy
for free trade. We saw some major hydraulic power generation schemes
coming to life. Foreign aid flowed in to the country. Hotels, tourism
many other sectors blossomed. But to everybody’s dismay, the bloody war
erupted. The war went on through the 90’s and the first decade after
year 2000. Everything else was on reverse gear.

We endured the brutal war and peace is here to stay. Terrorism defeated.
The wounds of war will take time to heal given the proper background to
heal.

We speak of better systems for politics, economics, education, and
infrastructure and so on. Will our country march towards a better
tomorrow, along those lines? When are we to stand on our own feet
without foreign aid?

All of us are tied up in a big mudslinging blame game. Greed has become
an order of the day. Where is that honor and dignity we used to have?
Everything and anything is surrounded by lies and deception. A country
without values will not contain itself and continue to be chaotic.

Where is that paradise once we had? Seems like, those values, the very
foundation for a better tomorrow, we have got them screwed up, somewhat
similar to a software engineering project built entirely on a bad design
with spaghetti code, from beginning to end.

Values which cherished in our country for centuries and we had walked
away from them. Indeed, our country is cracking up; no one seem to care;
And being sane in an insane country has become a tough call to many.

*“Democracy cannot succeed unless those who express their choice are
prepared to choose wisely. The real safeguard of democracy, therefore,
is education.”   
― *[***Franklin D.
Roosevelt***](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/219075.Franklin_D_Roosevelt)*,
President of United States of America, During Second World War.*
