---
title: Importance of IOT testing 
author: Kawshi Bandara 
linkedin: 
---

**What is IOT?**

In Internet of things, devices are connected through a network to
exchange huge amount of data. Simply IOT is a giant network of connected
things. When connecting, the relationships can be various. The things
may also include people. Therefore, in IOT the relationships can be
between people and people, people and things and also things and things.

IOT is a rapidly developing market, which is around for several years.
Since the count of devices and software in IOT is increasing day-by-day,
more testers and testing will be required to find the defects in IOT
software.

**IOT Testing**

When testing internet of things we need to redefine the Software Quality
Assurance engineers’ role. The testers need to focus more on the user
centric testing. In addition, more than finding bugs they need to
prevent them from occurring. The QA engineers need to influence both
development and operational process. Testers should have more domain
knowledge and the ones who do not have experience in testing hardware or
embedded systems may need to develop their skills on those areas.

**Building QA environment**

When building a QA environment for IOT testing purposes should orient
people to get amalgamation skills. The teams need to have a view towards
performing integrated tests. For make things easy, the teams should look
for tool build opportunities. If possible should build labs that serves
the entire digital portfolio. The main thing is to build a culture
within the team to “test as a user”. It is the best approach for IOT
testing. Therefore, the QA team may have to leave the mindset to do the
testing only against the requirements.

**IOT Testing areas**

1.  Connectivity

2.  Security

3.  Performance

4.  Functionality

5.  Compatibility

6.  User Experience

<!-- -->

1.  Connectivity testing

    When testing connectivity the main thing the testers need to
    consider is the seamless connectivity. To share data among several
    devices it is necessary to have a continuous connectivity
    between them. When testing IOT, testers need to make sure that the
    connections between devices are always up and running. And the other
    important thing is that the devices should be able to restore the
    data when the connections are lost.

    There are four challenging area testers need to consider when
    testing continuous connectivity in IOT testing.

-   Signaling

-   Presence detection

-   Power consumption

-   Bandwidth

1.  Security testing

    In IOT, there are more possibilities for cyber attaches. There can
    be more threats with financial data. In addition, IOT ecosystem
    provides multiple entry points for attaches. Another obvious thing
    is that the devices can be stolen. Because of these reasons, QA
    engineers who do the IOT testing need to pay more attention to the
    security aspects of the IOT software.

2.  Performance testing

    The performance testing plays a major part in IOT testing. It is
    because there can be device-to-device communication,
    device-to-server communication, server-to-server communication.
    Since we are mainly dealing with network, things like network
    bandwidth, latency, packet loss can affect the performance of
    the systems.

3.  Functionality testing

    In IOT also testers need to test the functionalities of the related
    web or mobile applications against the business requirements. Also
    as a functional test, the access control should be tested properly.
    It is mainly because when it comes to IOT accessing to the networks
    and devices should be authorized in a strict manner. Testing the
    capacity, security, reliability of the data storage comes under the
    functionality testing as well.

4.  Compatibility testing

    The device-to-device communication protocols are not compatible.
    This may lead the user to select devices that employ a
    common protocol. In IOT, lack of standardization can lead to
    incompatibility issues. Therefore, the compatibility needs to be
    validated for combinations of devices, protocols and
    operating systems.

5.  User Experience

    The systems should be clear and concise all the time. They should be
    user friendly and familiar. In addition, the IOT systems needs to be
    attractive and efficient. They should be consistent and forgiving.
    When testing the software from the users perspective testers need to
    consider all the above-mentioned characteristics in the system.

    **Challenges QA face in IOT testing**

    When testing an IOT related software, there can be so many
    challenges for the QA engineers. Below mentioned are the main
    challenges that the testers may come across while testing
    the systems.

<!-- -->

1.  Expensive to replicate the QA environment

2.  Difficult accessibility

3.  Lack of resources

4.  Sensor quality and accuracy

5.  Compatibility Issues

6.  Complexity

7.  Connectivity issues

8.  Power problems

9.  Security/Privacy issues

10. Safety Concerns

To do a perfect IOT testing the testers need to overcome all the
above-mentioned challenges one by one. They need pay much attention to
those areas that can go wrong.

**Summary**

IOT brings many new things to the table in terms of testing
requirements. The Internet of things poses fresh challenges to
developers and software testers that will stretch their skills. QA
engineers may have to change their approaches in order to do a proper
IOT testing. Learning about exact IOT testing can be a benefit for all
the testers who wish for a bright future in the software industry.
