---
title: Performance Testing with JMeter
author: Chandima Imalika
linkedin: https://lk.linkedin.com/in/chandima-imalika-959a3a107
description : Internship, Highlights, Geveo, Life Style
---


***Performance Testing with JMeter***

“An ounce of performance is worth pounds of promises.”

-Mae West

In software engineering, the performance of a software is an essential
quality attribute as it can completely make the system inefficient and
useless.

Performance testing in the sense, give a combined idea of load testing,
stress testing, volume testing and capacity testing. Here the first two
plays a major role where;

-   Load Testing - How many users the system can handle concurrently
    without getting slower.

-   Stress Testing - What is the maximum number of users a system can
    handle without crashing

So without certifying these quality attributes, it's risky to deploy a
software.

So now I'm going to share my knowledge on the basics of software
performance testing using Apache JMeter.

***Apache JMeter Installation***

First install Java in your computer and to make sure it has installed
properly, type **java -version** in command prompt. Go to 
*http://jmeter.apache.org/download\_jmeter.cgi* and download the
following zip file.

<img src="/img/Chandima1.png" width="461" height="155" />

Unzip and save it into a preferred location. To open the JMeter GUI, go
inside that folder and then to the **bin** folder. Open **jmeter.bat**
file and now you can see the following interface, the home page of
JMeter.

<img src="/img/Chandima2.png" width="654" height="383" />

### **Let's Start...**

We can begin with the Test Plan. Give a name to it using Name field and
save it by going to **File&gt;&gt;Save Test Plan
as&gt;&gt;FileName.jmx&gt;&gt;Save**

Here JMX stands for Java Management Extensions.

Before run the test, fist we have to add the necessary elements to our
test plan.

-   Thread Group

-   Sampler

-   Listeners

-   Assertion Groups etc

***Thread Group***

Thread Group is a group of users. We specify how many users we want to
use to send concurrent requests to the server. Right click on **Test
Plan&gt;&gt;Add&gt;&gt;Threads (Users)&gt;&gt;Thread Group**

<img src="/img/Chandima3.png" width="638" height="338" />

Explanation:-

*5 users (Thread Count) send requests to the server, so the second user
is sending his request 1 second \[5(Thread Count)/5(Ramp-Up Period)\]
after the first user has been sending and each user is sending the
request twice (Loop Count). If the 'forever' checkbox is ticked, the
test is running until we stop it.*

####  

***Sampler***

Here we specify that what kind of request the thread groups should send
to the server. It can be HTTP, FTP etc. As we are testing a web server,
we choose HTTP Request.

Right click on **Thread Group&gt;&gt;Add&gt;&gt;Sampler&gt;&gt;HTTP
Request**

In 'Server Name' column we type the URL & the port number of the website
that we want to test. If we want to navigate from that base URL, we add
that remaining part of the URL in the path field. For example, if I'm
going to test [Sri Lanka Telecom Website](http://www.slt.lk) and then
navigate to the 'About Us' page of it,

-   First make one HTTP request "MainSite" including following details;

Server Name or IP: *www.slt.lk*

                        Port Number: *80*

                        Path: *"keep it empty"*

<img src="/img/Chandima4.png" width="624" height="320" />

-   Then make another HTTP request  ''AboutUs" and include following;

  Server Name or IP: *www.slt.lk*

*                      * Port Number: *80*

*                      * Path: *//en/about-us*

<img src="/img/Chandima5.png" width="624" height="312" />

***Assertions***

Using this element, we can specify the limitations or boundaries which
to filter the results.

For example; In Response Assertion, if we type the pattern of the
response as 200, the test will pass the responses which contains the
response code 200 and fail if another code is there.

Types of Assertions:-

-   HTML Assertion- *the test will only pass the HTML responses*

-   XML- *the test will only pass the XML responses*

-   Duration- *the test will only pass the  responses whose duration
    obey the rule we specify*

-   Size- *the test will only pass the  responses whose sizes obey the
    rule we specify*

-   Response- *the test will only pass the responses which includes the
    response code that we specify here (For example, if we mention 200
    as the response code, the test will fail the responses with
    404 responses.)*

We can disable or enable any type of assertion by right click on it and
click "Disable/Enable".

####  

***Listeners***

Up to now, we have added thread group to send requests, specify them
what kind of request to use and defined the test pass/fail criteria.
When the server get the request and send the response, there should be a
mechanism to track it and organize the stats to give us a clear idea
about how was the journey. Listeners come to the ground for this task.

Right click on **Test
Plan&gt;&gt;Add&gt;&gt;Listeners&gt;&gt;&lt;Listener Type&gt;**

There are several types of listeners;

-   **View Results in Table**

Here the responses are displayed in a table specifying the various
features of the response; Sample, Start Time, Thread Name, Label, Sample
Time, Status, Bytes, Sent Bytes, Latency, Connect Time.

<img src="/img/Chandima6.png" width="624" height="319" />

-   **View Results Tree**

Here the responses are displayed in tree view and expanding each record
displays the detailed descriptions of the sampler result, request and
response data.

<img src="/img/Chandima7.png" width="624" height="315" />

As we have specified the size assertion to 70000 bytes, as this is just
65476 bytes, the test is failing.

<img src="/img/Chandima8.png" width="624" height="310" />

-   **Graph Results**

Here the responses are analyzed and presented as a graph. We need mainly
the throughput and the deviation to analyze the graph.

<img src="/img/Chandima9.png" width="624" height="318" />

Throughput- *It represents the ability of the server to handle heavy
load.  The higher the Throughput is, the better is the server
performance.*

Deviation- *the deviation from the average. The smaller the better.*

### *Run a Test Plan*

Before run the current test plan, make sure you delete all the previous
records by clicking on one of these icons(1).

<img src="/img/Chandima10.png" width="624" height="37" />

Then click the 'Start' icon (2) or simply press ctrl + r.

(3) icon shows the number of errors in the test and  (4)implies how the
threads(users) are adding to the test while it is running.

 

Now we have done most of the basics of Jmeter. There are many more
features to explore in JMeter and hope this will give you the base.

I'm also a beginner in JMeter so please feel free to share your feedback
and knowledge.

I would like to thank Geveo Australasia for organizing Tech Boost
sessions for the new comers to boost up with latest technologies and
special thanks to Biman Pathirage for his Tech Boost session on JMeter.

Thank You :)
