---
title: Trip to Bali
author: Chandula Bulathsinhala
linkedin: https://lk.linkedin.com/in/chandulab
---

Bali is a small island in Indonesia. It is all about beaches, beautiful
paddies, beautiful people, good food and most importantly so much fun‚Ä¶¬†
So let us get to the point. Oh yea please excuse the quality of the
photographs. I do not own a camera; as a result, these were all taken
from my phone üôÇ

-   **First Impression the Airport**

There were no direct flights to Bali from my part of the world (Sri
Lanka) so I had to travel to Singapore and then to Bali. To my surprise
(probably because of the lack of traveling experience I have had at that
time), ‚ÄúNgurah Rai International Airport‚Äù of Bali was a very busy
airport. Things went very smooth for us at the airport. Although if you
are a tourist who gets visa on arrival, you may want to rush to those
counters as soon as you get off the flight as it gets pretty crowded
each time a flight lands.

-   **Money**

The first thing you want to do is get some Bali money (Indonesian
rupiah). Brace yourselves for a bucket load of cash. 1 USD = 13619 IDR.
So do not get confused. Keep calm and count the money before leaving the
airport immediately. Naturally, people tend to get confused with such a
lot of money. I am talking about millions and billions of IDRs here üôÇ
there are some notes, which look the same. Be mindful of that when you
pay. You will find that naturally all items for sale are in millions
IDR.

We spent 5 days in Bali. I had arranged the places to visit to with a
tour guide called [*Gusti Bali *](http://www.topholidaysbali.com/)(who
was excellent BTW). He was our driver/guide for our stay. This
arrangement was very easy for us (especially when switching hotels Gusti
was very trustworthy). It is as if we had our own vehicle in Bali. Here
goes a few highlights from my trip, which I think every single one of
you visiting Bail should experience.

-   **Water Sports**

Get your swimsuits and sun block ready. You can find many water sport
providers alongside of the beach in the north of Nusa Dua. Rates are the
same. Includes various water sports, which would be so much fun if you
were traveling with a bunch of people. We tried the banana boat, flying
fish and the sea walker. Cost us (there were only two of us) 300USD
total. If I had to do it, again I would have dropped the flying fish and
gone for parasailing instead. Sea walker is ideal for fish lovers as you
get to feed beautiful fish deep down. If you are afraid of fish DO NOT
GO. In addition, the water sports people will ask you if you need photos
taken, for which they will charge extra. Our photos were not that great
in quality so I recommend not spending extra money on that.

-   **Water blow Beach**

OMG. This place is so much fun It is a must. If the tide is high, man
will you be in for a party! This is located in a posh area with fancy
hotels and shopping malls. You will see many tourists in beachwear as
you will get soaked if you go close. The first day we visited this place
we were not aware of what fun it was. So all we did was look from far.
It looked so much fun that we booked a hotel close by just to get
soaked. The person getting soaked in the video is me üôÇ Yea the waves are
that big: O: O You MUST go here.

<img src="./img/Chandula1.jpg" width="624" height="351" />

-   **Jimbaran Sea Food Dinner**

If you are a seafood lover this is necessary do for you. The seafood
cafes are located on the sand in three main groups between Kedonganan in
the north, just south of the fish market, to Jalan Bukit Permai in the
South. The accepted method of ordering food at Jimbaran is to check out
the fresh fish at the front of cafe, choosing the items you want and
asking the price. If the restaurant is crowded, you may have to wait a
couple of minutes to get a table (which is totally worth it). I
personally am not a seafood fan, but this was very tasty. Our table was
facing the beach and had a view of the runway of the airport, which was
very relaxing.

<img src="./img/Chandula2.jpg" width="624" height="351" /><img src="./img/Chandula3.jpg" width="624" height="351" />

-   **Mount Batur Volcano, Kintamani**

Climate is cold here around 15 degrees. We stayed in a cozy beautiful
hotel named [*LakeView Eco
lodge*](http://www.tripadvisor.com/Hotel_Review-g303952-d309158-Reviews-Lakeview_Ecolodge-Kintamani_Bali.html).
The volcano is located along with a lake, which makes it a breath taking
sight. There is a hike to the top of the volcano, which we were unable
to do due to jetlag. It is in my bucket list for sure. Do not miss the
sunrise, which is just beautiful.

<img src="./img/Chandula4.jpg" width="624" height="351" /><img src="./img/Chandula5.jpg" width="624" height="351" />

-   **Oka AgroTourism ‚Äì Cofee Luwak**

Bali is famous for coffee luwak (poop coffee: P). this farm was a
completely new experience and once again the scenery was just beautiful
to sip a hot cup of coffee/tea. A cup of luwak coffee was priced at five
USD. They give you to sample different types of tea as well.

<img src="./img/Chandula6.jpg" width="624" height="351" /><img src="./img/Chandula7.jpeg" width="624" height="351" />

-   **Lunch at Labhagga Restaurant Pacung**

This restaurant offered a memorizing view to dine. Located in a
beautiful village. The food was very tasty. Balinese are also very
famous for their duck.

<img src="./img/Chandula8.jpeg" width="600" height="314" /><img src="./img/Chandula9.jpeg" width="600" height="314" />

-   **Tanah Lot Temple**

Another beautiful temple located on a rocky island. A pretty amazing
view of the sunset too. There is actually an audience to watch the
sunset. I suggested you go early and reserve your place, which is free
of course, üôÇ üôÇ
