---
title: Internship Highlights
author: Chandima Imalika
linkedin: https://lk.linkedin.com/in/chandima-imalika-959a3a107
description : Internship, Highlights, Geveo, Life Style
---


***“All the world’s a stage,***
***And all the men and women merely players;***
***They have their exits and their entrances...”***

It’s only one day remaining to complete my six months of internship at
Geveo. It’s really hard to say goodbye to my Geveo family as I have so
much lovely memories with you all. As Shakespeare mentioned in his above
poetry, I also was an infant when I first join with Geveo who had no
experience on what was going in the industry. But now I hope I have
grabbed so much new things to both my professional life and personal
life during this fun filled six months. The credits should go to Geveo
for who I am today. So let me unfold some pages of my internship story.

I first got to know about Geveo when I was assigned to coordinate the
UCSC mock interview sessions with Geveo. I never thought that I would be
this much lucky to be selected from the mock interview itself. My
heartiest thanks and gratitude to Menaka and Dinesha for recruiting me
as a Software Quality Assurance Engineer Intern at here. While my
friends were complaining how the other company interview panels
depressed them while interviewing, I felt how blessed I was to get
pleasant feedback as that was our mock interview. That was the first
moment I got that impression of how professional the Geveo people are.

The internship programme of Geveo is highly appreciable. They were
always responsible on what they do and they always wanted to see we are
getting the maximum out of our internship. In that case to boost up with
the technologies used in Geveo, the Tech Boost sessions played a great
role. I learned how to apply the theories we learned in university and
the session conductors were always available for our clarifications.

During my stay, I saw that Geveo practices Scrum at its best. The Scrum
training by Hethu was a really good session which we got a chance to
clarify some doubts in real application of scrum rules. I could actively
participate in Scrum ceremonies and there I could map the Scrum theories
I learned in university. It was a great opportunity there to improve our
communication skills and as both individuals and teams, we can identify
our strengths and weaknesses and go ahead as an organized team. Special
thanks for giving me the opportunity to experience the Scrum Master
role.

Weekly Tech Talk is another event that I can’t leave without
remembering. I’m really grateful to the Career Development team for
their effort to uplift and sharpen the skills of Geveo employees. I hope
I could grab the attention of Geveo to emphasize the value of
accessibility testing in our products through my presentation. And the
best thing is when you are sharing something to others and finally you
also getting a priceless evaluation from the audience. That was a really
good opportunity for me to improve my technical skills, research skills,
presentation skills and so on.

As I saw, Geveo always tries to blend their people with each other no
matter whatever their religion, cast or colour. Geveo Code-A-Thon is a
fine example to prove that. The randomly selected teams get together,
spent sleepless nights sharing their knowledge and as a team they
reached the goal. Also between the teams they helped each other and it
was really interesting to watch a sharing, caring competition. I could
learn API testing with SoapUI and I hope I could contribute my best to
my team.

During my six months of internship I worked first four months in
Bonafide and rest in IPG. I was really lucky to work with such
supportive teams and understanding team leads. They didn’t assigned me
heavy work load at once. With my progress the work was increased and
whenever I’m stuck with issues, the team was there to guide me.

Aligning with QA standards, I practiced to design test cases using
Microsoft Test Manager and I followed to highlight the key words in test
steps and order the test cases based on their priority. Also I was keen
on keep my test cases up to date with changing requirements. During the
Test Case Reviews I got the chance to see how the senior QA s have
designed their test cases and I could identify what are the test
scenarios I have missed and how to improve the test coverage through my
test cases.

The developers also collaborated when I reported bugs and they were
really humble to agree for the suggestions we made. When I’ve stuck with
any technical issue they fixed it while explaining the cause and the
fixing. Because of that, whenever I encountered a similar issue again, I
could try the previous learned solutions again and recover without
directly seeking the developer’s help. Likewise I learned so much new
things with the collaboration of my team members.

As an overall, I was exposed to various technologies and tools like
Microsoft Test Manager, Microsoft Visual Studio 2015, Zoho Bug Tracker,
Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio, SoapUI, Postman, Test
Automation, Zoom etc. Also it’s a pleasure to me that I could get a
professional qualification during the internship; ISTQB CTFL. When I was
preparing for it almost every QA helped me and also the experience
gained in projects was really helpful in answering exam questions.

Likewise during past six months I experienced almost every basic aspects
in Software Quality Assurance with the help of all Geveo members. Also I
hope that I got the confidence that needed to go ahead with my future
academic stuff and career path. So thank you Geveo Australasia for
everything you gave me and I’m really proud for being a Geveo family
member.
