---
title: Newman Command Line Integration for API Testing with POSTMAN
author: Nadeesha Gnanaratne
linkedin: https://lk.linkedin.com/in/nadeeshapra
description : Newman, Postman, API Testing, Integration
---


API (Application Programming Interface) testing is one of the latest
trends in software testing. Basically an API enables the communication &
data exchange between two separate software systems. An API contains
functions/sub functions which can be invoked by another software system.
Testing an API is different from conventional UI testing because the
tester needs to test the business layer rather than the presentation
layer.

In the context of API testing & development POSTMAN is a REST client to
test RESTful APIs. Not only to send requests & receive responses from a
particular API but also provides with a full-featured testing sandbox to
write & execute JavaScript based tests for the API.

When it comes to API testing with POSTMAN it’s a tedious & inefficient
task to execute requests one by one from a large collection of requests.
Assume there are 20 HTTP requests & associated tests for each request.
Executing each request separately would consume lot of amount of time.
And also it’s hard to get a proper insight about the test results when
executing requests separately.

Considering above problems which occurs running requests separately
could be avoided by using Newman. Newman is a command line collection
runner for POSTMAN. It allows to run & test a POSTMAN collection
directly from the command line. It would give a clear insight regarding
the test results. Below steps will guide you to running a POSTMAN
collection with command line.

Test Scenario: HTTP POST method SignIn would create an authentication
token. The other methods would use that generated authentication token
as a header when sending the request.

STEP1 - Install POSTMAN native app & send a request

You can install POSTMAN native app depend on the OS from below link

<https://www.getpostman.com/apps>

First of all you should have to create an environment to create & send
requests. To create an environment click on Manage Environments from
Environment options. From MANAGE ENVIRONMENTS modal click on add button.
Add an environment name & add key value pairs. These key value pairs
could be used as {{key}} within the environment.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha1.png" width="624" height="580" />

-   Enter {{urlAuthentication}}/SignIn POST request in the URL field or
    you can use the entire
    URL http://localhost:8501/Authentication/SignIn. And add request
    body & set the content type as application/JSON

<img src="/img/Nadeesha2.jpg" width="624" height="256" />

-   Click on ‘Send’ button to send the request

-   You can see the response body in JSON format where
    SignInOperationResultValue(authentication token) has been received
    which have to be send in the header of other requests.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha3.png" width="624" height="191" />

STEP 2 – Script to add dynamic behavior to requests

-   Add a script to fetch the authentication token generated from a
    particular request .In manage environments modal add a key as &lt;
    DroppointAuth\_Token &gt;. From below script, generated
    authentication token from the SignIn request would capture to the
    DroppointAuth\_Token parameter. From that approach we can maintain
    the flow of request execution from a proper manner. After execution
    of the below script would capture the token in to the placeholder in
    the created environment where could be used by other requests if we
    defined that common parameter in the request header
    as {{DroppointAuth\_Token}}.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha4.jpg" width="624" height="231" />

<img src="/img/Nadeesha5.jpg" width="624" height="214" />

-   Above request {{urlManifest}}/SaveManifests request header requires
    generated authentication token. Current approach would be affective
    if we’ve got a token which would’ve been expired.

STEP 3 – Add a POSTMAN collection

-   A POSTMAN collection consists of set of requests which could be used
    to test a particular API. Or it can be defined as a collection of
    HTTP requests (GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE) and associated
    pre-request scripts or test scripts. Assume ‘TESTAPI’ collection
    consists of 12 requests (SignIn, SaveManifests, GetUsername,
    CanToggleLocation etc.). Specific thing is we have to send every
    request in a specific order. After sending ‘SignIn’ request would
    initiate other requests because generated authentication token needs
    to be send in the request header of other requests. Because of that
    kind of dependency does exists, we can consider a POSTMAN collection
    as a kind of ordered test.

-   To add a request to a POSTMAN collection, you have to click on
    ‘Save’ button after creation of the request. It would prompts the
    below modal.

    <img src="/img/Nadeesha6.jpg" width="624" height="678" />

    You can specify the name of your collection from the above modal.
    Pre created collection shows in the below image.

    <img src="/img/Nadeesha7.jpg" width="293" height="841" />

STEP 4 – Environment setup for Newman

Newman \[resides in the NPM registry and on GitHub\] is a command line
collection runner for POSTMAN. It facilitates the POSTMAN collections to
be integrate with continuous integration (CI) servers like Jenkins &
Travis CI for GitHub. Also can be integrate with build systems. Most
important thing is with just one command you can run your entire
collection & take a proper insight regarding the collection.

-   Newman is built on Node.js so you have to install Node.js on your
    machine prior Newman installation.

-   After Node.js installation Newman is just a command away. You can
    install Newman from npm globally which allows you to run it
    from anywhere.

    $ npm install -g newman

STEP 5 – Export POSTMAN collection as a .JSON file

Click on the ellipses (…) next to the collection you wish to export.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha8.jpg" width="624" height="553" />

Click on ‘Export’ option will navigate you to EXPORT COLLECTION modal.
Which you can select the second option (Collection v2). After that you
can save the .json file for the selected POSTMAN collection.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha9.jpg" width="549" height="383" />

STEP 6 – Run the POSTMAN collection from Newman

$ newman run mycollection.json

<img src="/img/Nadeesha10.jpg" width="624" height="476" />

-   Above command would run the entire collection & provides you with
    necessary details regarding the requests within the collection.

<img src="/img/Nadeesha11.jpg" width="624" height="634" />

-   Above gist generated from Newman would provide you with the status
    of the desired POSTMAN collection. In other words, you can get the
    answer to the most important question you’ve been suffering from “Is
    that API functioning as expected”?

HAPPY TESTING!!
