\---

title: Hydroponics

author: Iranga Navarathna

linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/iranganavaratna/

description : Hydroponics, Agriculture

\---

Agriculture is the science that is related to cultivating plants and livestock.
It has been one of the most important parts of the human livelihood since the
beginning of civilizations. Cultivation is still the backbone of the economy in
some countries where there is fertile land.

But do we really need fertile land or soil for cultivation? The answer is NO.
Plants need light, water, temperature and nutrients to grow. Beside these
factors, plants need a medium to grow in. Usually, that medium is soil. However,
plants can also grow in water or inert mediums such as perlite, rockwool, peat
moss and gravel.

Hydroponics is a fine example where fields or large lands with fertile soil is
not needed to grow crops. This technique uses water to grow plants in. The
plants are placed in a way that the roots are in contact with water. The water
is usually mixed with nutrient solutions so that the plants can absorb the
necessary minerals from it.

\#\#\#\# Variations of hydroponic systems

There are different types of hydroponic systems based on how the plant is
exposed to the nutrient solution. The most common methods include deepwater
culture, wicking, aeroponics, Ebb and flow, dripping system and nutrient film
technique. A hybrid hydroponic system can also be made by combining different
methods according to the requirement.

\*\*Deepwater culture\*\*

This is one of the cheapest and easiest methods of hydroponics. In this method,
a tank is used to store the nutrient solution. The solution in the tank needs to
maintain a constant oxygen level. This is accomplished using an air pump. The
plants are put in net pots and the net pots are immersed in water.

\<img src="/img/Iranga_1.jpg" width="600" height="300" /\>

\*\*Wicking\*\*

In these systems, the plants do not come in contact with the nutrient solution
directly. The plants are placed on a grow tray which contains a growing medium
such as perlite. Wicks are used for taking the nutrient solution from the tank
to the growing medium using capillary action.

\<img src="/img/Iranga_2.png" width="600" height="300" /\>

\*\*Drip system\*\*

In drip systems, the nutrient solution flows slowly across the growing medium.
Growing mediums such as rockwool or peat moss can be used in these systems. The
medium should be able to hold the nutrient solution for a while so that the
plants can absorb them. The excess water can be collected and reused in these
systems.

\<img src="/img/Iranga_3.png" width="600" height="300" /\>

\*\*Aeroponics\*\*

This method exposes the roots of the plants to a mist of nutrient solution. The
plants are kept inside a chamber where there are nozzles to spray water. Pond
foggers can also be used for creating the mist.

\<img src="/img/Iranga_4.jpg" width="600" height="300" /\>

\*\*Nutrient film technique\*\*

This method uses a continuous flow of nutrient solution through the system which
is reused. The plants are kept on a tilted plane so that the water flows back to
the tank.

\<img src="/img/Iranga_5.jpg" width="600" height="300" /\>

\*\*Advantages of hydroponics\*\*

1. Since no fertile land is needed, cultivation can be done anywhere.

2. Crops can be grown indoor with no effect by the climate.

3. Utilization of land and space can be maximized by using vertical racks.

4. Can be used in small spaces such as apartments.

5. Uses only 10% of water compared to crops that are grown in fields. This is
possible since the water is recirculated through the system.

6. Crops grown using hydroponics have a better growth rate.

7. Since no soil is used, there will be no weeds growing among the crop.

8. The effect of diseases and pests is minimal since these are used in
controlled environments.

9. Maintaining a hydroponic system is much easier than maintaining land with
crops. After the plants are placed all that needs to be done is to maintain the
nutrient levels, temperature and light.

\*\*Disadvantages of hydroponics\*\*

1. High initial investment.

2. Technical knowledge is required on equipment and agricultural knowledge is
required to set the best environment for the plants.

3. Risk of power outage and system failures.

\#\#\#\# Conclusion

Hydroponics is a concept which is been there for a while but, in the recent
past, it has become popular The main reason for this is that hydroponic systems
can be set up anywhere with limited space and no fertile soil. These can be used
in small spaces such as apartments as well as in large scale greenhouses for
mass production.

With the advances in technology, hydroponics can be used for cultivation with
minimum labour. The factors such as temperature, humidity, nutrient levels,
light, etc. should be monitored continuously in hydroponic systems. If that is
automated, labour is needed only to set up the equipment and harvest once the
plants are grown.

Hydroponic systems can give a better yield with lesser usage of water and land
than traditional agricultural methods. Usage of less land and water is vital
since both of them are scarce resources. Therefore, hydroponics can become the
future of agriculture.

\#\#\#\# References

• https://www.fullbloomgreenhouse.com/hydroponic-systems-101/

• https://www.explainthatstuff.com/hydroponics.html

• https://www.greenandvibrant.com/advantages-disadvantages-of-hydroponics
