\---

title: Thinking Beyond Working From Home

author: Nilmani Ruwanthika Menikge

linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nilmanimenikge/

description : Productivity, HRM

\---

The Coronavirus pandemic has forced all of us (individually and collectively) to
re-think every aspect of our lives. One such aspect is our approach to work.
Currently, businesses are forced to change traditional modes of operations for
at least white-collar jobs, where most of the work is conducted at an 'office'.
This situation is like to stick in a post-pandemic world, where working from
home will be more mainstream.

However, working from home does have some real challenges for everyone involved.
Let's look at some of these challenges and how to resolve them:

\# Common Challenges:

1. It's very common for some to end-up working too hard while others have
difficulty focusing on work.

2. Lack of supervision and coordination will make working from home ineffective,
especially if you and your co-workers are not accustomed to such a decentralized
mode of operations.

3. It's easy to get your self distracted (kids/spouse, choirs at home, TV, and
social media).

4. Working from home for a prolonged period can be daunting, eventually leading
to a lack of motivation.

\*\*Here are some tips:\*\*

1. Give yourself a dedicated/comfortable workplace where you can avoid your
kids, pets, noises, and other distractions. It is better if you can find a
workroom that you can close the door to avoid noises. If it helps, explain to
your family members that working from home is not a vacation!

2. Make a schedule and stick to it. Coordinate with your team members to create
routines, agree on meeting times, and break periods where it's possible. This
will help everyone avoid surprises and be effective as a team while still
maintaining work-life balance.

3. Stick to a morning routine before starting work. Jumping on the bed and start
working with your pajama suit is not the way to go.

4. In the evening, you can write notes of pending stuff and plan the next day.

5. Protect your work-life balance. You need to respect your working hours; when
you are off you are off.

6. Take breaks and take meals on time.

\# Challenges for Managers:

1. Extra effort to coordinate with team(s) than in an office setting.

2. Lack of visibility into the current status, especially if you and/or your
team is new to working from home.

\*\*Here are some tips:\*\*

1. Establish structured daily check-ins. Set the agenda for meetings. Write
meeting notes and circulate.

2. Get yourself trained in relevant processes and tools/technologies. Experiment
to figure out what helps your team move forward and what does not. Keep in mind
that process/tools/technology is only there to help your team progress. It's
possible that what worked for Team A does not work for Team B!

3. Provide several different communication technology options.

4. Provide opportunities for remote social interaction.

5. Offer encouragement and emotional support to your team.

\---

title: Thinking Beyond Working From Home

author: Nilmani Ruwanthika Menikge

linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nilmanimenikge/

description : Productivity, HumanResource

\---

The Coronavirus pandemic has forced all of us (individually and collectively) to
re-think every aspect of our lives. One such aspect is our approach to work.
Currently, businesses are forced to change traditional modes of operations for
at least white-collar jobs, where most of the work is conducted at an 'office'.
This situation is like to stick in a post-pandemic world, where working from
home will be more mainstream.

However, working from home does have some real challenges for everyone involved.
Let's look at some of these challenges and how to resolve them:

\# Common Challenges:

1. It's very common for some to end-up working too hard while others have
difficulty focusing on work.

2. Lack of supervision and coordination will make working from home ineffective,
especially if you and your co-workers are not accustomed to such a decentralized
mode of operations.

3. It's easy to get your self distracted (kids/spouse, choirs at home, TV, and
social media).

4. Working from home for a prolonged period can be daunting, eventually leading
to a lack of motivation.

\*\*Here are some tips:\*\*

1. Give yourself a dedicated/comfortable workplace where you can avoid your
kids, pets, noises, and other distractions. It is better if you can find a
workroom that you can close the door to avoid noises. If it helps, explain to
your family members that working from home is not a vacation!

2. Make a schedule and stick to it. Coordinate with your team members to create
routines, agree on meeting times, and break periods where it's possible. This
will help everyone avoid surprises and be effective as a team while still
maintaining work-life balance.

3. Stick to a morning routine before starting work. Jumping on the bed and start
working with your pajama suit is not the way to go.

4. In the evening, you can write notes of pending stuff and plan the next day.

5. Protect your work-life balance. You need to respect your working hours; when
you are off you are off.

6. Take breaks and take meals on time.

\# Challenges for Managers:

1. Extra effort to coordinate with team(s) than in an office setting.

2. Lack of visibility into the current status, especially if you and/or your
team is new to working from home.

\*\*Here are some tips:\*\*

1. Establish structured daily check-ins. Set the agenda for meetings. Write
meeting notes and circulate.

2. Get yourself trained in relevant processes and tools/technologies. Experiment
to figure out what helps your team move forward and what does not. Keep in mind
that process/tools/technology is only there to help your team progress. It's
possible that what worked for Team A does not work for Team B!

3. Provide several different communication technology options.

4. Provide opportunities for remote social interaction.

5. Offer encouragement and emotional support to your team.
