---

title: How a Skeleton Starts its Motion

author: Sithara Dissanayake

linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sithara-kalpani-5977b5116/

description : MovieMagic, Movies, VisualSimulation

---

Starting from the first ever animated movie, we have grown up with quite a lot
of such fascinating imaginations that look alive by now. Not only that, the
typical movie industry too has stepped forward, broadening in a large scale,
mingling with the lively imaginary characters. There are fictional movies like
Avatar, as you may very well know, has completely contrasting environments and
creatures acting. So as the video game industry. The game characters you play
with behave just as real human beings. Secret behind this is the development of
simulation strategies and technology.

<img src="/img/Sithara_1.jpg" width="800" height="300" />

How the topic of this post relates to the movies and games is ‘Motion Capture’.
Motion capture in its real essence is capturing a real motion or behavior and
adjoining it with an artificial character so that the final virtual outcome
would do the same or a similar behavior. It was introduced so as to speed up the
then animation process which was known as rotoscoping-a technique to trace with
modifications. In the game engines like Unity and Unreal the typical motions for
the items like trees, water, animals..etc. are available in libraries. Also,
there are human animations too. But what if the game needs a game character with
complex behaviors continuously like, shooting and fighting? Similarly, what if
the film director wants a lion to act? This is where the experts in the movie
industry jump into a black suit with dots everywhere with mostly a camera fixed
in front of the dotted face. And their motions are recorded, and fed real time
into a skeleton. (This is not the only methodology for motion capture.)

<img src="/img/Sithara_2.jpg" width="600" height="400" />

So, this is a skeleton. Using tools like MotionBuilder, Maya, 3ds Max, FBX,
Unity and Unreal you can easily construct a skeletal as shown. It can be
constructed using lines or solid materials and the final skeleton should at
least possess the basic structure of the character you are up to animate. After
building up the basic structure you have to identify the joints or the pivot
points. The dots you see in this image are the pivot points of this character.
If you test the skeleton at this point, you are able to rotate the character
around pivot points.

Now let’s have a look on the special dress with dots. The dots or the markers
correspond to each dot in the virtual skeleton. For instance, our elbow needs a
pivot point since it is a joint in the human anatomy. When the actor moves the
skeleton begins to move with the help of some sophisticated algorithms developed
by the engineers. As per the below image, if the human bends his knee, the robot
too will do the same. Simple as that.

<img src="/img/Sithara_3.jpg" width="500" height="400" />

I did mention at a point about the dots in the face. Why do they capture the
motion in a face? It is just because the face muscles motion tremendously when
expressing our expressions, which is a great advantage and time saver for the
animator if those motions too can be captivated rather than developing by
himself. Obviously, there may be some modifications done, by the emotions of the
final outcome would be very realistic in this case.

<img src="/img/Sithara_4.jpg" width="700" height="400" />

<img src="/img/Sithara_5.jpg" width="700" height="400" />

This article is just a glimpse of how the marker-based motion capture is done
with magnetic system. There are some other methodologies namely acoustical,
mechanical and optical systems. Also, there’s a marker less motion capture
methodology too.

In Sri Lanka this marker-based methodology is so novel to the industry, and as
to my knowledge it is only being used in the movie industry. That is a very good
trend though. You will witness the Sri Lankan’s performances in motion capture
with the upcoming animation movie ‘Gajaman’ in the near future.

<img src="/img/Sithara_6.jpg" width="700" height="400" />

There’s a very outstanding and amazing performance done by Benedict Cumberbatch
in the movie ‘The Hobbit’ as the Smaug. If you are really interested in this
topic you can watch it from the below link;

[[Watch the video]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXN9IHrnVVU)

**References**

https://www.ign.com/articles/2014/07/11/a-brief-history-of-motion-capture-in-the-movies

https://www.academia.edu/3713860/MOTION_CAPTURE_PROCESS_TECHNIQUES_AND_APPLICATIONS
